Prof: Okay,
we're going to pick up where we
left off with talking about Marx
last time.
I was just talking to some of
the teaching fellows about how
the sections went,
and it seemed like there was
some confusion or lack of,
what's the word,
lack of comfort with this
concept of exploitation in Marx.
Just where does it come from
and how does exploitation occur
when people are making voluntary
Pareto exchanges?
And I think that is the right
question to zero in on,
and we're going to spend more
time on it both today and next
time,
because it really is important
for Marx's argument to work that
exploitation is not about
cheating people.
It's not about getting people
to do things involuntarily.
The idea behind the concept of
exploitation is equivalent is
exchanged for equivalent.
Use-values are voluntarily
exchanged.
So another way of putting it,
if you like,
is that the transaction between
the employer and the worker is a
Pareto superior transaction,
and Marx is not claiming that
it isn't.
So then you might say,
"Well, what is this idea
of exploitation?"
And we saw that in some ways
it's quite counterintuitive
because when we worked through
this,
the only way in which the
capitalist can increase his
productivity is by either
increases in what Marx called
absolute surplus value,
which is basically lengthening
the working day,
getting people to work harder.
There are obviously physical
limits to that and political
limits.
Workers are going to organize.
They're going to get the Ten
Hours Bill passed through
Parliament, as they indeed did.
And so then you get the other
approach,
what he called increases in
relative surplus value,
which is technological
innovation, so that the
capitalist can cover his wage
bill in less time.
And so the necessary labor time
goes from four hours to three,
and there's seven hours of
surplus labor time where the
workers producing goods,
that when sold,
produce value that is not
accrued to them,
okay?
We saw there was something
counterintuitive here,
and we're going to come back to
that,
in that most of you figured you
would choose three over two if
you had to take one of them,
but that's actually a higher
rate of exploitation.
And I started talking about the
assumptions about how people
compare themselves.
Remember the self-referential
versus other referential,
and we'll come back to all of
that.
But the point I want to make
first,
and to get you just clearly to
understand,
is that this kind of move,
increasing productivity by
technological innovation,
Marx and modern economists all
agree is the thing that makes
capitalism dynamically
productive.
Because it's the pressure to
innovate that is created by
capitalist competition that
leads to technological
innovation and more and more
capital-intensive production.
Because if you think about it,
the more you're spending on
technology to make your labor
more productive the less you're
spending on your wage bill,
and it's only living human
labor-power that creates fresh
value according to Marx.
And so when we think about this
line moving this way we're
thinking about production
becoming ever more capital
intensive, right?
More and more spent on
technology to make the workers
more productive,
and we should expect capital
intensity to increase over time.
When you see Marx use phrases
like "the organic
composition of capital
increases,"
he's just saying that
production becomes steadily more
capital intensive.
Now you could say,
"Well, why is this
exploitation?"
Marx wants to say--this is,
I think, at the end of the day
not a very plausible argument
for reasons we'll see on
Wednesday.
He wants to say this is not a
moral argument.
This is not a normative
argument.
He's using it as a technical
term.
And so the fact that people
don't feel more exploited in
this circumstance than in this
is neither here nor there.
It's true in the
class-in-itself sense that I
talked about last time,
that they, objectively
speaking, are more exploited.
He has an argument about why
they will eventually come to
feel more exploited that we'll
attend to a little bit later
today,
but for right now he just wants
to say this is an objective
argument.
Now you could say,
"Well, so is the rate of
exploitation the rate of
profit?"
And the answer is no.
It's not the rate of profit
because the value that's created
here,
the so-called variable capital,
which just covers the wage
bill,
is separated out from capital
that is spent on everything
else.
So it's true that the
capitalist's profit comes out of
here, but so do rent,
research and development costs,
advertising,
mail, you name it.
So profit is some subset of
this but not the totality of it.
So the rate of profit is not
the same thing as the rate of
surplus value.
And the rate of profit is also
not the same as the rate of
exploitation.
But what he is assuming in the
concept of exploitation is that
the worker is producing some
value that ultimately accrues to
the capitalist.
Now I said to you,
when we started out talking
about Marx, that just like the
neoclassical theorists he has a
micro theory and a macro theory.
You now know what the micro
theory is.
It's this story here.
You might think about it.
This diagram is to Marx what
the Pareto diagram is to the
Pareto system.
This is the micro story of
exploitation in the same way
that the Pareto system is the
micro theory of market
exchanges.
But at the end of the day,
of course, there's a macro
theory as well.
As I said, Marx,
like Adam Smith and David
Ricardo before him,
had an invisible hand theory.
And I think the easiest way to
get a grip on his macro theory
is to talk about the five
sources of crisis in capitalist
systems that he thought followed
from his analytical logic.
And I'm just going to spell
them all out now.
None of them is without its
problems,
and we'll come back to the
problems later today and mostly
on Wednesday,
but I think it's better first
to see the argument in its
totality before we start
dismembering it and see what
survives and what doesn't
survive closer critical
scrutiny.
So in the first instance one of
the possible sources of crisis
is the existence of money.
Now money for Marx is a
commodity like anything else.
This is, of course,
before the era of paper money
and anything like that.
So money is gold or silver or
something like that,
and it's a commodity like any
other commodity.
Its value is determined by the
cost of producing it.
So gold is valuable because it
takes a lot of work to dig it
up, basically,
and to refine it.
Obviously for a commodity to
function as money it's got to
have certain properties.
It's got to be easily divisible.
If we used sheep it'd be kind
of hard because if you want to
use one leg of a sheep to
represent three bottles of wine
you'd have to kill the sheep,
wouldn't be very convenient.
So money has to be easily
divisible and not atrophy and
things like that.
Those are its properties as a
use-value, if you like,
but as an exchangeable
commodity it's like anything
else.
But once you get a developed
market system it depends on
money to function,
and there's the ever-present
possibility of liquidity crises
if people start hoarding money.
And he thinks that in times of
anxiety and so on people will
start to hoard money.
We saw this,
if you remember,
during the financial crisis
last year where suddenly banks
that had trusted one another for
decades and even centuries
stopped trusting one another and
wouldn't lend money to one
another in ways that they
regularly did because they
didn't know whether the other
party had the money to lend.
And there was a period of
several weeks where the entire
financial system was in danger
of crashing simply from the
liquidity crisis that sort of
was perched on top of the credit
crisis.
So once the system becomes
completely dependent on money as
a medium of exchange there's the
ever-present possibility that
people will hoard money and the
system will go into a crisis.
Secondly, Marx thinks he's now
understood,
better than Smith and Ricardo
before him,
just why it is that there's a
declining tendency in the rate
of profit in capitalist systems.
And the answer is in the logic
of the system you've already
worked your way through.
So if you go back here,
as we move down here to make
the system more capital
intensive,
any given move increases
profitability for the person who
makes it.
So if this is the status quo,
and it's a cotton factory and
the capitalist puts in a
spinning jenny and makes his
wage bill more quickly than
anybody else,
that leads him to be able to
undercut his competitor,
and so his profits will go up.
But all of the competitors will
then make exactly the same
innovation themselves.
And then once you have
spinning-jennies throughout the
cotton industry the claim is
that the rate of profit in the
cotton industry will be lower
than before anybody had put in a
spinning jenny,
okay?
So the idea is,
what you do at the margin to
improve your profits as a
capitalist,
leads to the declining rate of
profit in the industry as a
whole,
because as we become more and
more capital intensive in the
production of cotton we have
less and less living human
labor-power going into the
production of cotton,
and it's only living human
labor-power that produces fresh
value.
Now you might say,
"But doesn't the spinning
jenny produce fresh value?"
Marx's argument is no.
The value of the spinning jenny
was determined by the labor to
produce the spinning jenny,
and its value is transferred to
the product,
but that's all.
It doesn't produce new value.
It's only the living human
labor-power.
And the way you need to think
about it is that that is less,
and less, and less,
of the capitalist's investment
as a proportion of his total
investment.
So living human labor-power,
or variable capital,
as Marx calls it,
is a diminishing proportion of
what the capitalist has to
invest in order to remain
competitive.
And so over time profits are
going to diminish in very
competitive industries because
they'll get more and more
productive.
And that's what we mean in the
modern world when we say there's
very little margin in a
particular industry.
If you want to go into making
something like salad dressing,
a very saturated market where
every gizmo has been tried,
you're going to find miniscule
margins;
very, very hard.
And Marx thinks this is a
process going on economy-wide,
and so that's why economy-wide,
the rate of profit gradually
declines in capitalist systems.
And as I said,
that's something that all of
the classical economists thought
that they had observed,
and so any theory worth its
name was going to have to
account for it.
So that's the second source of
crisis,
though, because as it becomes
harder and harder for
capitalists to make a profit
many of them are going to go out
of business.
And that brings me to the third
source of crises in capitalist
systems, and it's basically that
competition eliminates
competitors.
So that the initial market
model he starts with is a
perfectly competitive one,
but what he's saying is,
of course,
over time people go out of
business at the same time as
things are becoming more and
more and more capital
intensive--
another way of putting it is
the entry costs become very
high.
For instance,
in 1984 when the Challenger
blew up there was a company
called Morton Thiokol that made
the O-rings for the Challenger
on the rocket boosters.
It turned out that the design
was faulty.
Now you might say,
"Well, that was probably
the end of Morton Thiokol's
relationship with NASA.
Having made such a terrible
error they would go to a
competitor."
But guess what?
Morton Thiokol is still making
rocket boosters for NASA.
Because the notion that I would
say to myself,
"Hmm, looks like a good
business for me to get into.
They're obviously no good at it.
I'll go start making rocket
boosters for NASA,"
is laughable because the entry
cost is so high.
So that's an example,
pretty much,
of a monopolistic industry.
So competition leads to
innovation, yes,
but it also leads to the
elimination of competitors as
production becomes more and more
capital intensive.
And once you don't have
competitors you don't have a
reason to innovate,
and the basic dynamic of
capitalism starts to slow down
because monopoly capitalism
doesn't have the same inbuilt
incentives for innovation.
Remember, the capitalist is not
afraid of the worker in Marx's
story.
The capitalist is afraid of the
capitalist down the street,
and once there is no capitalist
down the street about to take
his business away or her
business away then this
competitive dynamic starts to
atrophy.
So that's a third source of
crisis as far as he is
concerned.
A fourth source of crisis that
Marx identifies,
and here he's pretty much
actually following Adam Smith,
the way you can think about it
most straightforwardly is the
workers collectively,
if they pooled all of their
wages, couldn't buy what they
produce.
The workers collectively can't
buy what they produce,
and that being the case there's
going to be an endemic problem
of weak demand in capitalist
economies.
There's not going to be enough
demand to satisfy.
demand to satisfy the needs of
the system in order for
everything that's produced to
get sold.
Big problem.
You could say, "Well,
doesn't that just mean wages
will rise,"
and indeed it does put some
upward pressure on wages,
but as we said,
wages are basically going to be
held around subsistence by
unemployment,
and so there's not much scope
for that, right?
Because if wages start to rise
you're then going to have the
problem that any capitalist
who's not in the system,
or would be capitalist,
or want to be capitalist is
going to come and hire
unemployed workers to work for
him or her and so drive wages
down.
So this is a problem.
It's why Adam Smith thought you
got imperialism,
and indeed Marx and Lenin after
him all thought one of the
reasons you get imperialism is
to find markets for the goods
that are produced.
There were other reasons too,
cheap resources and so on,
but one of the reasons is the
search for new markets,
more demand,
but that's a process which has
obvious limits because
eventually your empire is going
to bump into the French empire,
and the Belgian empire,
and the German empire,
and you're going to fill up the
world,
and then what do you do?
So you can stave it off with
imperialism, but the basic
underlying problem is that the
workers collectively cannot buy
what they produce.
Now we see this sort of dynamic
plays out in some ways during
recessions when there's not
enough demand in the economy,
and of course there are things
you can do about it.
You can do what we did in The
Great Depression.
The government can borrow money
and basically give it to
unemployed people by hiring them
to do public works,
and then they spend it and
stimulate demand,
or they can try what we've been
trying to do in the last year
and a half.
They can try and get the banks
to give credit to people to buy
things and stimulate demand.
But it's a basic structural
problem,
Marx thinks,
built into the system by the
very fact that the workers
collectively cannot purchase
everything that they produce.
Now you could say, "Well,
these are all sort of
tendencies, but there are
counter tendencies as well,
and these problems can be
staved off,"
imperialism being an example of
staving off,
the one I've just discussed.
And Marx is not particularly
clear on just which one of these
problems is supposed to be
decisive.
Rather, what he thinks is
they'll all sort of kick in and
start to make the system creak
at the joints and not work very
well.
And as that starts to happen,
workers will start to get mad
because they will start to
discover that the system isn't
giving them any particular
benefits;
the famous line towards the end
of The Communist
Manifesto that you all read:
"Workers will come to
realize that they have nothing
to lose but their chains."
The system that has given them
certain benefits will give them
fewer and fewer benefits as
competition becomes more
cutthroat.
Their employers are working
with narrower and narrower
margins.
They're unable to buy the
luxury goods that they see all
around them,
and so they'll start to become
angry,
and that leads us to the
discussion we had last time
where we see that Marx wants to
say that their declining
relative share of the total
product is eventually going to
make them militant.
And so the image is of a system
becoming less and less dynamic,
a smaller and smaller number of
monopolies in every industry,
capitalists who are going out
of business falling down into
the working class bringing all
their resentments with them,
and finally the system starts
to reach the point where it just
can't function,
and that's when he thinks the
socialist revolution becomes
both possible and necessary.
And so you will get some sort
of revolutionary moment,
and the workers will take over
the state,
and the small remaining number
of monopoly capitalists will be
put out of business,
the means of production will be
nationalized and then socialism
will exist.
So that's the story that he's
telling.
Now I want to zero in on a few
features of socialism and
communism before we start,
and then we'll come back and
talk about the difficulties with
this argument.
Socialism for Marx is not an
equilibrium any more than
capitalism is.
Socialism is not a system that
is without its own internal
contradictions according to
Marx.
And the reason is as he says
here,
What we have to deal with is a
communist society,
not as it has developed on its
own foundations,
but, on the contrary,
just as it emerges from a
capitalist society;
which is thus in every respect,
economically,
morally, and intellectually,
still stamped with the
birthmarks of the old society
from whose womb it emerges.
Accordingly,
(now he's talking about after a
socialist revolution) the
individual producer receives
back from society--
after the deductions have been
made--
exactly what he gives to it.
So another way you might put
this is workmanship is no longer
hypocritical.
Under socialism the worker
really gets back what he's put
in.
"He receives a certificate
from society that he's furnished
such-and-such an amount of labor
(after deducting his labor for
the common funds);
and with this certificate,
he draws from the social stock
of means of consumption as much
as the same amount of labor
cost."
So you have what he describes
here as the rights that workers
get to what they've produced,
he says, it's "still in
principle--
bourgeois right,
although principle and practice
are no longer at loggerheads,
while the exchange of
equivalents in commodity
exchange exists only on the
average and not in the
individual case."
Don't worry about that last
phrase, but what he's saying
here is that principle and
practice are no longer at
loggerheads.
What he means is the worker is
being recompensed for his work,
right?
Whereas, under capitalism the
worker appears to be being
recompensed for his work,
but in fact some of what he
produces is accruing to the
capitalist.
So that's the difference.
Principle and practice are at
loggerheads under capitalism.
It professes the idea that
we're entitled to what we make,
whereas under socialism we,
in fact,
do get what we make,
and in that sense,
socialism is an advance on
capitalism.
But he says,
"In spite of this advance,
the equal right is still
constantly stigmatized as a
bourgeois limitation.
The right of the producers is
proportional to the labor they
supply;
the equality consists in the
fact that measurement is made
with an equal standard,
labor."
Now what does all that mean?
It's rather contorted language,
but just look at a little more
of the contorted language,
and then I'll explain in words
of one syllable what it means.
This is from The Critique of
the Gotha Programme,
and what he wants to say is
even if you reward people
equally,
equally for their work,
there's going to be inequality
in the society.
So he says, look,
One man is superior to another
physically, or mentally,
and supplies more labor in the
same time (works harder),
or can labor for a longer time;
and labor, to serve as a
measure, must be defined by its
duration or intensity,
otherwise it ceases to be a
standard of measurement.
This equal right is an unequal
right for unequal labor.
So if some of us are stronger
than others and we get paid
according to how much work we do
some of us are going to get more
than others, right?
"An equal right to unequal
labor."
It recognizes no class
differences, because everyone is
only a worker like everyone else
(once we get to socialism);
but it tacitly recognizes
unequal individual endowment,
and thus productive capacity,
as a natural privilege.
It is, therefore,
a right of inequality,
in its content,
like every right.
Right, by its very nature,
can consist only in the
application of an equal
standard;
but unequal individuals (and
they would not be different
individuals if they were not
unequal) are measurable only by
an equal standard insofar as
they are brought under an equal
point of view,
are taken from one definite
side only--
for instance,
in the present case,
are regarded only as workers
and nothing more is seen in
them,
everything else being ignored.
Further, one worker is married,
another is not;
one has more children than
another, and so on and so forth.
Thus, with an equal performance
of labor,
and hence an equal in the
social consumption fund,
one will in fact receive more
than another,
one will be richer than
another, and so on.
So if you think about a system
in which there is no longer a
capitalist,
but people are rewarded on the
basis of work there's still
going to be inequality because
some people have more effective
capacities to work than others,
and because some people have
more demands on them than
others.
If you have more children to
feed than somebody else earning
the same amount,
it's going to leave you
relatively worse off.
So socialism is not a condition
of equality because there is
this right based upon labor.
And he says,
These defects are inevitable in
the first phase of a communist
society (which is socialism) as
it is when it has just emerged
of the prolonged birth pangs
from capitalist society.
Right can never be higher than
the economic structure of
society and its cultural
development conditioned thereby.
In a higher phase of communist
society,
after the enslaving
subordination of the individual
to the division of labor,
and therewith also,
the antithesis between mental
and physical labor,
has vanished;
after labor has become not only
a means of life but life's prime
want;
after the productive forces
have increased with the
all-around development of the
individual,
and all the springs of
co-operative wealth flow more
abundantly--
only then can the narrow
horizon of bourgeois right be
crossed in its entirety and
society inscribe on its banners:
From each according to his
ability,
to each according to his needs!
"From each according to
his ability, to each according
to his needs;"
that is the definition of the
distributive principle under
communism,
whereas under socialism it's
"from each according to his
ability,
to each according to his
work."
So socialism is not
hypocritical with respect to the
workmanship ideal,
because unlike capitalism the
workers get rewarded for their
work,
but it's still an unequal
society because people are
differently abled,
and people have different
demands to meet.
And so finally we have to get
to the abolition of the very
idea of rights in order to get
to the communist idea of
"from each according to his
ability,
to each according to his
needs."
So that's the Marxian story.
I'm sorry I put such long
quotations up there,
but I think you need them to
get a flavor of how he was
actually thinking about it.
There are these interaction
crises all of them making one
another worse,
declining profits,
liquidity crisis,
more and more militant workers,
and so on and so forth.
Finally you get an increase in
consciousness,
this socialist takeover.
It's still an unequal system,
but it has the capacity for
superabundance,
"For cooperative wealth to
flow more abundantly,"
and so we can abolish the idea
of right completely and just
distribute on the basis of
needs.
Now I want to start digging
into this in a critical way to
show you all of the things that
are wrong with it,
but this is in the spirit of
how we treated utilitarianism.
That is to say,
we're going to see all of the
things that are wrong with his
argument,
in the same way that we did
with Bentham and Mill,
in order then to see if there's
any surviving intuition.
And I want to start with this
concept of needs.
One of the reasons Marx and his
followers were so focused on
needs was that they were
convinced that in order to keep
itself going,
capitalism manufactures
pseudo-wants all the time.
We already saw there's this
problem with insufficient
demand.
You've got to get people to
want things.
believe if you don't have the
latest whatever-it-is,
you're a schmuck.
My son looks at my Blackberry
Tour and he says,
"How can you use a phone
like that?
Nobody uses those anymore.
You've got to have a Google
phone, and if you don't have a
Google phone you're just a
complete loser."
That's his view of the matter.
And because there's this
problem of weak demand there's
this built in emphasis to
constantly manufacture demand
for things that nobody needs.
But the impulse to create all
of these phony needs will go
away once you don't need
capitalism to innovate.
So once you don't have
capitalism, you don't need
people to constantly think that
they have to have the latest
gizmo.
You don't need to try and get
people to think of the 27 kinds
of dishwashing liquid in Stop
and Shop.
This one's better than that one.
All these manufactured
artificial needs are an artifact
of the problem that we have to
keep capitalism going,
and once that goes away we can
think about people having finite
needs.
And so if society reaches a
certain level of abundance then
those needs can be met.
Who thinks that's a terrible
argument?
Okay, what's bad about it?
Take the--over here, yeah?
Student:  It just
doesn't seem like a good model
of human nature and it puts a
limit on how much you can want.
Prof: It what?
Student:  It puts a
limit on how much you can want.
It seems like everyone has to
want the same amount of things.
Prof: I think those are
good points.
What else is wrong with it?
I mean, surely it's true that
some of the things--there is a
difference between wants and
needs, and a lot of our wants
are very frivolous,
right?
There are a lot of things that
we want.
A neoclassical system doesn't
differentiate because we don't
allow interpersonal judgments of
utility, right?
So Trump thinks that he needs
the next hundred million dollars
and you might say,
"He might want it,
but he doesn't need it."
But what's wrong with that?
I just want you to elaborate on
what you were saying,
or somebody else elaborate on
what you were saying.
Yeah?
Student:  It's hard to
know how the government will
decide what people need and what
they just want.
Prof: You're troubled by
the idea of the government
deciding what people will need
and what they just want.
I think that's fair enough,
but I think Marx in his most
utopian moments--
after all, one of the
differences between socialism
and communism is,
there is no government under
communism.
There's a withering away of the
state.
So his idea,
I think, is there's just going
to be all this super--all these
goodies everywhere and people
will just take what they need.
Student:  Where does the
abundance come from,
also?
That's another problem.
Prof: It's been made
possible by capitalism.
The productivity of capitalism
will have...
Student:  And then it
gets used up and then there's no
more capitalism to create more.
Prof: Okay,
so you're saying we might go to
superabundance,
but then fall back from it.
Yeah, I think those are good
criticisms.
So why will there be continuing
abundance?
I think that's a fair
criticism, but I think there's a
more fundamental problem with
it,
and that is in distinguishing
wants from needs you could say,
"Look,"-- even before
you get to those problems which
you both raised serious
questions for it,
but even before you get to
those questions,
somebody might say, "Look.
We can at least define needs by
what people require in order to
survive."
Surely if we want to
distinguish wants from needs we
make a distinction between
things that if you don't get
them you're going to die versus
them you might not be that
happy,
but you're not going to die.
What about that?
Who thinks that that would
solve Marx's problem?
Anybody?
Why wouldn't it?
Who thinks it wouldn't?
You just said we're going to
reach a level of productivity
where we can produce what people
need in order to survive,
and then we could get rid of
the regime of rights.
I think Marx makes a very valid
point when he says,
"Any regime of rights is a
regime of inequality."
Yeah?
Student:  Well,
I think that's kind of keeping
with the same thing they had
during capitalism.
Like if it's still just
subsistence level,
if that's what you need then
that's the same thing the
workers had under capitalism.
It's not really making
communism a better society for
the people.
Prof: Okay,
so you're saying a world in
which people only meet their
needs may not be a better world.
Student:  Yeah.
Prof: Okay,
I think that might be a fair
criticism.
He wants to say the alternative
is that we're all like these
rats on wheels running faster
and faster to get less and less
benefit.
So unless we can accept
finitude, that we live for a
fixed time,
and if we can't come to grips
with the fact that we are finite
creatures we're never going to
be happy.
So I think that's the debate
that he would want to have with
you,
but I think that even within
Marx's own terms of reference
there's a different problem and
that is this.
Suppose you said,
"All right,
we'll grant you,
as a matter of the philosophy
of it,
we'll grant you,
Karl Marx, the proposition that
needs are defined by what is
necessary for people's survival,
and that they should somehow be
more important than Trump--
frivolous wants that might make
life better,
but still in-all making my life
better by letting me have a nice
car is less important than
preventing somebody from
starving when it really gets
down to it.
And so we could make this
distinction between needs and
wants in that sense.
But here's the problem.
Even if we're only trying to
meet people's needs defined in
that narrow sense of keeping
people alive,
there's still endemic scarcity.
This notion of superabundance
doesn't make any sense.
Just think about it for a
minute.
Money that we spend on dialysis
machines is money that we don't
spend on heart transplants or
AIDS research.
So no matter how much wealth
there is, there are still
distributive choices to make in
this society.
There's still going to be the
problem that we're going to say,
"Well, if we choose to
protect needs A,
B and C, anyone who needs
dialysis should get free
dialysis."
Whether we make it explicit or
implicit is beside the point.
Somebody who needs something
else to keep them alive is not
going to get it.
We're not going to do research
on cancer because we're spending
that next marginal dollar doing
research on the causes of AIDS.
So once you see that point,
then the notion of
superabundance becomes
incoherent.
There is no such thing as
superabundance.
And without superabundance you
can't get a world beyond
entitlements explicit or
implicit.
You're never going to transcend
the world of scarcity.
Once you see that meeting
needs, even defined in this
minimal way of what's necessary
to keep people alive,
involves tradeoffs,
what you're really saying is
that scarcity is endemic to the
human condition.
And this is the deepest
analytical flaw in Marx's
normative theory.
Because once you say that
scarcity is endemic to the human
condition you can't get away
from distributive conflict.
You've got to find some way
whether it's a system of rights,
whether it's the market,
whether it's the government
making decisions about who needs
what,
somebody or some mechanism is
going to make those decisions,
right?
So you reach the proposition
that scarcity is endemic to the
human condition and you have to
reason about what makes sense
taking that for granted.
In a way it's ironic that Marx
was so blind to this because
Marx was the person who said,
"Human nature's not
static.
It evolves through history.
We develop and change,"
and so you would think he of
all people would see that the
fact that in 1886,
the natural life expectancy
was, whatever it was,
forty-six years,
why that shouldn't be taken as
a given,
or the biblical three score
years and ten be taken as a
given for that matter.
But you'll never reach a
condition in which scarcity can
be transcended,
and that's the ultimate hope
behind his utopianism.
So it's not that I disagree
with any of the points you folks
made.
I think they're all correct.
There are other reasons that
you would question it,
but the reason this particular
argument,
I think, cuts at the roots of
his theory is that it's the most
favorable interpretation of his
account of needs,
right?
There's no more favorable
interpretation than limiting
them to survival,
and even on that account we
can't get to a world of
superabundance.
We will always live in a world
of scarcity, and that means that
whatever you have to say about
distribution has to take that
for granted.
This is, I think,
as powerful a point as the
point we made when we came to
the end of our discussion of
Mill,
to the effect that you can't
get the politics out of the
definition of harm,
right?
There's no neutral way to
define harm.
Another way of thinking about
this is it's a way of trying to
transcend politics,
right?
One of Engels,
not Marx, but never mind Engels
was stating a Marxian view,
was that the great thing about
socialism and communism is that
politics gets displaced by
administration.
That you don't have to worry
about distributive conflict in
this story because there's
superabundance,
right?
And in Mill's account you don't
have to worry about the
definition of harm in his case
because there will be a neutral
scientific account.
Neither of them works.
So we have a world in which
there have to be political
choices about distributive
questions.
Some say leave it to the
market, but that is itself a
political choice.
We'll have more to say about
that.
So the beginning of the end of
Marxism is, I think,
the recognition that scarcity
is endemic to the human
condition.
What we will do on Wednesday is
explore and unpack some other
difficulties with his argument
and then see whether and what
the remaining insights might be.
See you then.